Part One – the Three Trials

Walk to the Scumm (ahaa!) Bar

Open the door and get inside. Talk to the pirates inside to find out about the situation on the island. Talk to the important looking pirates and they will tell you about the three trials. When the cook is serving the pirates get inside the kitchen. Get the meat and the pot. Chase the bird away by rocking the plank. When it flies away, get the fish. Now, walk from the cliffside to the outpost.

Walk to the path outside the village. You will see map with a figure representing Threepwood.

Go to the clearing

You will find a circus there. Go inside and you will find two brothers quarreling. Talk to the Fettuccini Brothers. They will ask you to perform a dangerous feat. When ask whether you have brought a helmet, show them the pot you found in the kitchen. Go ahead and do the feat, you will bid 478 pieces of eight.

Now that you have enough money, go back to the village. Walk along the street until you found a man with a parrot. Buy the map from him. Talk to the three men standing in front of a rat. Take the minute if they give you 2 pieces of eight. Walk to the voodoo house. Walk inside and get the rubber chicken. Walk to the right and talk to the voodoo man inside. Ask him about you fortune. Go to the old man shop. It is the first house you will find after you walk the archway under the clock. Press the bell if he is not around. Get the sword and shovel. Pay the required amount to the old man before you leave. The shopkeeper only sell certain items when do certain things. So, after some encounter, you might want to return here again. Go outside the village.

Walk to the bridge

Give the fish to the troll so that you may pass. Go to the house. Open the door and talk to the one eye jack. Pay him the fee required to learn sword fighting. Show him the sword you have bought. After many hours of training, you will learn how to fight.

In this game, sword-fighting skill is dependent on how well you can insult your opponent as well as responding correctly to an insult. You will begin with a few insults and responds. As you come across other insults and responds, they will be added to your own list. So what you should do now is to fight with all those pirates that are moving around on the map. Just put yourself near the fork and they will automatically look for you. There is no need for you to go after them. Make sure you remember the correct responds. If you find a new insult, you should use as soon as possible so that you will know its correct responds. The better insults are listed at the top of your list. After you have won enough battle. You can then defeat the Swordmaster.

Go to the fork (or check out the map)

Take the following the to reach the Swordmaster. North. You should see a plant with yellow flowers. Pick up the flowers. North. East. East. West. North. You should see a signpost. Push it to lower the bridge. Cross the bridge and you will find the Swordmaster. Once the Swordmaster is found, you can go there directly from the map. You will need to respond to her insult correctly for five times before you can defeat her. Choose the correct responds from those you have gathered. Try until you have defeated her. Once defeated, her will give you something to prove her defeat.

The Governor's House

The mansion is guarded by deadly piranha poodles. Use the yellow petal on the meat. The meat will become drugged. Give the meat with condiment to the dogs. After they fell asleep, get inside the mansion. Open the door inside the mansion and you will get into the fight. This sequence is automatic, so sit back watch the cut screen. Check your inventory after the fight, a few items will be added to it. You will need a file in order to get the idol. Go to the prison and talk to prisoner. You will find that he will need some breadth refreshers. Go back to the shopkeeper and this time you can buy the breadth mints from him. Get the breadth mints and give it to the prisoner. Ask him for the file, he will then ask you for some rat repellent. Give the gopher repellent you found in the mansion to the prisoner and he will give you a carrot cake in return. Use (eat) the cake. There is a file inside. Now, go back to the mansion to get the idol. Jump into the gaping hole and you will get into another fight. After getting the idol. Talk to the sheriff. The governor will appears and chase the sheriff away. Talk to her (if you could). After she left, open the door to get outside the mansion. The sheriff will be waiting for you. You will be then be thrown into the sea by the sheriff. Inside the water, get idol and then walk up. Talk to the governor on the docks.

The Treasure Hunt

Go to the Scumm Bar. Talk to important pirates. Tell them your progress. Now go the fork again. This time you will need to find the lost treasure. Take the following path. North. You should see yellow flowers. West. You will find a campsite here. Take the left to the north. West. North. West. You should see a skeleton here. North. North. East. West. North. You should find a place full of red flowers. East. You will find an 'X' on the ground. Use the shovel on the 'X' to get the treasure.

Return to the village and you'll see the ghost ship sailing away. Talk to the cook. He will tell you that the ghost pirate, LeChuck, kidnapped the governor. Now, you must find a ship and get a crew of three to go after the ghost ship. Go to the Scumm Bar. Pick up all the five mugs that are on the tables. Go to the kitchen. Use the mug with the barrel, which contains grog. The grog inside is very corrosive and thus a mug will not hold the grog for long. When the mug is near dead, use it with another mug. You got no time to loose now, so better hurry up. Find the shortest way to the prison. Change the mugs on the way. When you reach the prison. Use the melting mug on the lock to melt it. Ask the prisoner to join your crew. If the mug is dead before you switch, go back to the bar and try again. Don't worry; you can always get new mugs in the bar. Go to the Swordmaster place. Ask her to join you. She will agree and ask you to meet her at the docks. Walk outside the village and go to the shore. Use the rubber chicken on the cable to reach the island. The man, Meathook will ask you to take a test. The test is quite simple. Touch the beast and he will join you. Go to the place where you find lights. You can find here...

Stan's Used Ship Emporium

Talk to Stan. Make sure you mention about buying the ships on credit. Well, you might want to look through all the ships but you will not be able to any single one of them. Before you leave, he will give you a business card. Now go the shopkeeper house. You might want to save the game at this moment. Ask him to get a note of credit for you. He will open the safe and get the note. Watch how he opens the safe. When you are sure of the correct combination (Note that the combination is different when you start another game. So, it is not possible to write it down in this solution) If you miss the combination, go outside and come back again. The shopkeeper will repeat the sequence again. When you are sure of the combination, ask him to look for the Swordmaster. Open the safe while he is away. Get the note of credit from the safe. Walk outside the village. Go the Used Ship Emporium. Talk to the man. Buy the Sea Monkey from him with the note of credit. Make sure you do your bargaining with him. You can do away with the entire extra in order to cut price. Start your offer with the minimum amount and gradually increases. When you bought the ship, he will give you a magnetic compass. Go back to the village. Your crews and ship will be waiting for you to set sail.
Part Two – The Journey

After your conversation with the crew, you will find yourself in the captain's room. Get feather pen, ink. Open drawer and get the dusty book. Read the book carefully, it gives hints as to how to reach the Monkey Island. Walk to deck. Talk to crew. Walk to rope ladder. Get the Jolly Roger (pirate flag) on top. Go down to the deck. Walk to the hatch behind the crew. You will find another hatch that led to the store and a door that led to the kitchen. Walk to kitchen. Get pot. Open cupboard and get cereal. Open cereal to get the prize. Look at the prize; it's a small key! Go down the second hatch to the storeroom. Open the chest to get the fine wine. Get the giant coil of rope. Open the kegs to get gunpowder. Go the captain's room. Open the cabinet with the small key. Open the chest inside the cabinet to get a recipe and some cinnamon sticks. Read the recipe. Go to the kitchen. It's time to get rid of all the redundant stuff in your inventory.

Use the pot with the followings: minutes, note, business card, feather pen, cereal, Jolly Roger, ink, breath mints, fine wine, 100% cotton T-shirt, T-shirt, rubber chicken, staple remover, small key, dusty book, cinnamon sticks and gunpowder.

The pot will explode and release a voodoo spell that will bring the ship to the Monkey Island. Note that not all items are necessary to be thrown into the pot. You do it just to reduce your inventory list. So throw in the gunpowder only when you have got rid of all the redundant items. Don't worry, any items that could be thrown into the pot is not important. Use the map on the red, hot fire to get a flaming mass. Go to the storeroom to get more gunpowder. Go to the deck. Use the gunpowder in the cannon nozzle. Use the rope on the cannon to serve as a fuse. Now, use the pot as a helmet. Light the cannon and sent yourself to Monkey Island.
Part Three – Under Monkey Island

Some explanations The Island can be assess by clicking at the crosshair to move your character. When move to a place of interest, its name will be shown. The names of location used here are exactly those used in the game. When in doubt, move around until the appropriate place is found. The cannon will send you to the beach. Pick up banana. Go to the fort to the western side of the island. Push cannon. Get cannon ball. Get gunpowder. Get rope. Get spyglass. Talk to Herman Toothrot. Go to river fork. Pick up stone under note. Look at the stone; it's a piece of flint. Climb up the hill with the footholds. At the middle of the hill, you will find a catapult. You can push/pull it to adjust its aim. Go to the hilltop. Use the spyglass. If you don't see the banana tree, go down and adjust the catapult again. Do it until you have the banana tree on target. Push the rock to activate the catapult. A message will be shown if you hit the banana tree. If your hit is not successful, pick up another rock from the heap of rock and try again. Hitting the tree will cause the bananas to drop. You can collect it later on when you go to the beach. Go down the hill. Go to the pond at the end of the dry river bed. You will find a man hanging on the tree. There is a coil of rope on his hand. So, in order to get the rope Go back to the river fork. Walk to dam. Use gunpowder on dam. Use the flint on the cannon ball to produce a rake. This will blow up the dam and release the water. Go back to the pond, the log will be floating and the dead body is on the ground. Get the rope from the dead body. Go to the crack. There is air of oars at the bottom. Tie the rope on the strong branch. Go down the rope. Tie the other rope on the sturdy stump. Climb down to get the oars. Go the beach with the banana tree. Pick up the bananas. Use the oars on the boat. Now, you can travel by sea to the northerner of the island. Note that you must land your boat on a beach before you can travel on foot.

Go to the village to the north

Walk to the giant head to the left. Pick up the bananas on the fruit bowl. Walk out of the village. Three cannibals will stop you. Talk to them. They will then lock you inside their guest room. Inside hut, get skull. Open the loose board underneath the skull. The hole will let you get out of the village. Go to the forest north of the beach with the banana tree to find the monkey. Look at the monkey. Give all the five bananas to the monkey. This will make him happy and follows you. When successful you will find a grey dot following you wherever you go. If you happen to lose sight of him, go back to look for him. (This only happened when you travel by boat) Go to the clearing at the eastern end of the island. Make sure the monkey is following you. Walk to totem pole. Move the cursor around until you find the nose on the totem pole. Pull the nose to open the gate. The monkey will then pull the nose for you so that you can go near the Gigantic Monkey's Head. Pick up the wimpy little idol. Look at idol. Go back to the village. Give the idol to the cannibals. They will then be friendly to you. Walk to the hut where you were taken to the other time. This time the door is opened. Get the banana picker. Walk to the right. The hermit Toothroot will be waiting for you. Give him the banana picker and he will give you the monkey head key. Exit the village and come back again. The cannibals will talk to you. Give them the leaflet. They will give you the navigator's head and necklace. Go to the Gigantic Monkey Head. Use the key the dig the Gigantic Monkey Ear to open the Monkey Head. This will open the Gigantic Monkey Head. Walk inside the Monkey Head. Use the navigator's head. Its nose will be pointing to the correct direction. Follow it until you have found the ghost ship. Don't go inside the ship yet. Talk to the navigator's head. Ask him until he agreed to give you the necklace. Wear the necklace before you enter the ghost ship. It will make you invisible to the ghosts. Go to the captain's room. Use the magnetic compass on the key. Walk to the deck. Climb down the hatch. You will be in the bedroom. Walk to the passage to the right. You will find some ghost chickens there. Get the ghost feather. Unlock the hatch with the key. Go down and you will find yourself surrounded by rats. You will need to get something in order to gets the rats. Go back to the bedroom. Use the ghost feather on the sleeping ghost. When tickled, he will drop the wine bottle. Get the jug o'grog and go back to the rats' room. Pour the jug o'grog on the dish. The rats will get drunk after drinking it. Get the glob of grease. Go back to the deck. Use the glob of grease on the squeaky door. Open the door. Get the ghost tools beside the ghost guard. Go back to the ghost chickens. Use the ghost tools on the glowing crate to open it. Get the voodoo root. Go back to the cave. Cut screen: You will travel back to the village and give the root to the cannibals. They will then prepare the root for you. Then you will travel all the way back to the ghost ship. You will find that the ship is gone. The ghost pirate, LeChuck, is going to marry the governor. So, you will need to go back to Melee Island to stop the wedding. Talk to funny ghost. Don't kill him. When your crew is back, listen to their conversation.
Part Four – Guybrush Kicks Butt

After another journey, you will be at the docks in the village. Use the potion on any ghost you encounter. Find you way to the church. Talk to LeChuck. Your potion will becomes jammed and you will be whack by the ghost pirate continually. You will be flying all over the place. When you find yourself in the emporium. Try to get the root beer before the ghost hit you. After you get the root beer, try to use it on the ghost. If you did it successfully, you will destroy the ghost and finish The Secret of Monkey Island.
Insults

As compiled by Dave Cooler.
Against the Pirates Insult 	Comeback
This is the END for you, you gutter-crawling cur!	And I’ve got a little TIP for you, get the POINT?
Soon you’ll be wearing my sword like a shish kebab!	First you better stop waiving it like a feather-duster.
My handkerchief will wipe up your blood!	So you got that job as janitor, after all.
People fall at my feet when they see me coming.	Even BEFORE they smell your breath?
I once owned a dog that was smarter then you.	He must have taught you everything you know.
You make me want to puke.	You make me think somebody already did.
Nobody’s ever drawn blood from me and no body ever will.	You run THAT fast?
You fight like a dairy farmer.	How appropriate. You fight like a cow.
I got this scar on my face during a mighty struggle!	I hope now you’ve learned to stop picking your nose.
Have you stopped wearing diapers yet?	Why, did you want to borrow one?
I’ve heard you were a contemptible sneak.	Too bad no one’s ever heard of YOU at all.
You’re no match for my brains, you poor fool.	I’d be in real trouble if you ever used them.
You have the manners of a beggar.	I wanted to make sure you’d feel comfortable with me.
I’m not going to take your insolence sitting down!	Your hemorrhoids are flaring up again, eh?
there are no words for how disgusting you are.	Yes there are. You just never learned them.
I’ve spoken with apes more polite then you.	I’m glad to hear you attended your family reunion.
Against the Sword Master Insult 	Comeback
I’ve got a long, sharp lesson for you you to learn today.	And I’ve got a little TIP for you. Get the POINT?
My tongue is sharper then any sword.	First you better stop waving it like a feather-duster.
My name is feared in every dirty corner of this island!	So you got that job as a janitor, after all.
My wisest enemies run away at the first sight of me!	Even BEFORE they smell your breath?
Only once have I met such a coward!	He must have taught you everything you know.
If your bro ther’s like you, better to marry a pig.	You make me think somebody already has.
No one will ever catch ME fighting as badly as you do.	You run THAT fast?
I will milk every drop of blood from your body!	How appropriate. You fight like a cow.
My last fight ended with my hands covered with blood.	I hope now you’ve learned to stop picking your nose.
I hope you have a boat ready for a quick escape.	Why, did you want to borrow one?
My sword is famous all over the Caribbean!	Too bad no one’s ever heard of YOU at all.
I’ve got the courage and skill of a master swordsman!	I’d be in real trouble if you ever used them.
Every word you say to me is stupid.	I wanted to make sure you’d feel comfortable with me.
You are a pain in the backside, sir!	Your hemorrhoids are flaring up again, eh?
there are no clever moves that can help you now.	Yes there are. You just never learned them.
Now I know what filth and stupidity really are.	I’m glad to hear you attended your family reunion.
I usually see people like you passed-out on tavern floors.	Even BEFORE they smell your breath?